Bangalore (officially known as Bengaluru), is the capital of the Indian state of Karnataka. It has a population of over ten million, making it a megacity and the third most populous city and fifth most populous urban agglomeration in India.[16] It is located in southern India on the Deccan Plateau. Its elevation is over 900 m (3,000 ft) above sea level, the highest of India's major cities.
A succession of South Indian dynasties, the Western Gangas, the Cholas and the Hoysalas, ruled the present region of Bangalore until in 1537 CE, Kempé Gowd? – a feudal ruler under the Vijayanagara Empire – established a mud fort considered to be the foundation of modern Bangalore. In 1638, the Mar?th?s conquered and ruled Bangalore for almost 50 years, after which the Mughals captured and sold the city to the Mysore Kingdom of the Wadiyar dynasty. It was captured by the British after victory in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1799), who returned administrative control of the city to the Maharaja of Mysore. The old city developed in the dominions of the Maharaja of Mysore and was made capital of the Princely State of Mysore, which existed as a nominally sovereign entity of the British Raj.
In 1809, the British shifted their cantonment to Bangalore, outside the old city, and a town grew up around it, which was governed as part of British India. Following India's independence in 1947, Bangalore became the capital of Mysore State, and remained capital when the new Indian state of Karnataka was formed in 1956. The two urban settlements of Bangalore – city and cantonment – which had developed as independent entities merged into a single urban centre in 1949. The existing Kannada name, Bengal?ru, was declared the official name of the city in 2006.
Bangalore is sometimes referred to as the "Silicon Valley of India" (or "IT capital of India") because of its role as the nation's leading information technology (IT) exporter.[1][18][19] Indian technological organisations ISRO, Infosys, Wipro and HAL are headquartered in the city. A demographically diverse city, Bangalore is the second fastest-growing major metropolis in India. It is home to many educational and research institutions in India, such as Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Indian Institute of Management (Bangalore) (IIMB), National Institute of Fashion Technology, Bangalore, National Institute of Design, Bangalore (NID R&D Campus), National Law School of India University (NLSIU) and National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS). Numerous state-owned aerospace and defence organisations, such as Bharat Electronics, Hindustan Aeronautics and National Aerospace Laboratories are located in the city. The city also houses the Kannada film industry.



Safety

Source type 1: Bangalore is one of the safer cities to live in India. Anyone who has traveled around India, lived other places, will know that’s a fact. 

Source type 2: Bangalore’s cool quotient has taken a drubbing with the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) report for 2012 saying it is the second highest crime-prone metro in the country. While the city tops the list in the number of robbery and dacoity cases registered in the country, it also stood second in the number of reported cases of rape, kidnap and murder.

There were 670 robberies last year — ahead of Delhi (522) — while it tops other metros with 37 dacoity cases. With 266 murders reported, Bangalore is next only to Delhi (408). It also stands second in kidnappings, with 532 reported, as against Delhi’s 3,274. 



Accidents

Bengaluru roads are getting safer for users. According to the traffic police department. The number of accidents has reduced from 7,506 in 2016 to 4,648 in 2017. This is a big improvement, especially considering that the population of the city only continues to grow. R Hithendra, additional commissioner of police (traffic), attributes the improvement to better enforcement. More stastics available at: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/road-accidents-deaths-dip-in-bluru/articleshow/61971361.cms.



Health

Bangalore’s health sector is on a par with global standards with the best medical practitioners, state-of-the-art infrastructure and technologically advanced equipment. Yet, it is always second to cities like Chennai and Mumbai. Experts from the medical fraternity converge at DNA to tell us how Bangalore can be the health hub of tomorrow.
Dr Jawali: Over the last 20 years, Bangalore’s health care facility has seen tremendous growth. Today, Bangalore has the credit of performing the highest number of cardiac surgeries in India with over 30% of paediatric cardiac surgeries. And over a period of time, the city has evolved as a home for minimally invasive cardiac surgery. The reverse brain drain phenomenon has brought in highly qualified professionals from abroad to work here. After the IT-BT boom, now it is the turn of the health industry.
Dr Gopinath: Bangalore is already a medical hub. What we lack today is just the need to package and market it in the right way. The city has been attracting patients from all over the world. We now need to be more disease specific and differentiate between the areas that we excel in and those which need more attention and then take action accordingly.Dr Jayaram: The strides that we have taken in medical advancement in Bangalore over the last two decades have been impressive. We are on a par with any metro city, not only in India but globally too. Take for example cardiac science, where we are among the best in the world. But I won’t say that we have achieved equally across the board. There are areas which need to be refined and improved upon. There is a need for the medical community and licensing authorities to sit down and analyse the fields where we still underserve and work on these medical specialties or sub specialties. While earlier we were city-specific, the cosmopolitan nature of the city, climate and the expats residing here have been attracting many people from abroad to seek treatment here.What is the scope of medical tourism in Bangalore? What needs to be done to make the city the next big health hub?
Dr Prasad: Statistics show that nearly seven lakh people came in from the US for treatments in 2007. The numbers came close to a million the following year. Therefore, there is scope for enormous growth in terms of medical tourism in Bangalore, the city being one of the fastest growing in Asia. However, apart from the medical facility that is available in the city at a much cheaper cost than in the West, if we can tag in tourism as part of the package by showcasing aspects of the rich cultural heritage and the nature of India, it will attract more people. This, in turn, will generate revenue and will also improve the economic viability for our people. Moreover, the government hospitals too provide good facilities and state-of-the-art equipment. That needs to be maintained well and marketed properly.What are the reasons for our lagging behind Chennai, Mumbai or Singapore when it comes to healthcare?



CCTV

Commercial establishments in the Bangalore as well as other public places will soon have to compulsorily install closed circuit television cameras (CCTV) surveillance systems in order to help the city administration crack down on crime.
The Bill envisages installation of surveillance systems in order to create a visual record  of individuals to prevent, track and detect crimes, including theft. With a population of over 1.3 crore, currently the city has only 5.4 lakh cameras, besides 2,000 installed in government-owned buildings.
“If there will be CCTVs, criminals will fear getting caught and this will reduce the crime rate. CCTVs that can record in high definition are recommended and these should be functional even during non-business hours and the night hours. We are giving a time of three months to comply with this decision. Those not following the instructions will be penalized,” Home Minister Ramalinga Reddy told Express.
This is an excelent move. It will greatly improve the cities surveillance and make the city much more safer.



Hotels and food

Mumbai has one among the best hotels and restaurants. At Mumbai, tourists can enjoy great quality and variety of cuisine from all parts of the world. 



Public toilets

Availability: Now, a survey done by a city-based nonprofit  has found that the IT capital of the country is short by more than a thousand (1,100) public toilet complexes, according to the Swachh Bharat (Clean India) Guidelines— the flagship scheme introduced by the PM Modi-led BJP government.

Quality: The survey found three toilet complexes in the city to score a perfect 10 when it comes to cleanliness and accessibility. These are at Pattabhiram Nagar, Bharathi Nagar and Attiguppe. Of the three, one is maintained by the BBMP while the other two are maintained by private contractors.

Shockingly, only 10% of male and 6% of female toilets have functional flushes, resulting in unhygienic conditions which pose a health hazard.

Less than half (47%) of the toilets had clean floors and only close to 60% of the toilets had sufficient lighting.

Dustbins were found only in 13% of the men’s toilets and 12% in women’s. 63% of men’s toilets had washbasins while 58% of the women’s toilets did not have wash basins. 



Natural hazard and emergency services

In Bengaluru, coordination of all the concerned departments including police, fire and safety, home guards, armed forces (in case of necessity), National Disaster Response Force, BWSSB, BESCOM etc is the task of the BBMP and Bengaluru Urban District Disaster Management Authority.

Each district has a disaster management authority chaired by the Deputy Commissioner, as per the Disaster Management Act, 2005. The Chairman of the Authority periodically convenes meetings of various departments and chalks out disaster management plan for the district.

This helps Bengaluru efficiently coordinate between various departments to provide the essensial emergency services. Each department is well funded and has among the best access to resources in the country.



Public transport

Bangalore, or Bengaluru, is a city in southern India. Here, you’ll find modern, affordable transportation options, including the metro, buses, taxis, and trains.

Recently finished, the Bangalore Metro is a safe and efficient way to get to different parts of the city. As in many cities in India, you must pass security before you’re allowed to board. After you’re through, the crowds can be quite dense and the riding conditions are crammed. It’s not the most comfortable way to travel, but it will quickly get you where you need to go.

Bus and Taxi
When you land at the airport, you’ll see several buses and taxis waiting for passengers. Many hotels run shuttles to and from the airport, so look for these first. If this isn’t provided, compare the rates offered by the commercial bus companies and the taxis. The bus may be a little less expensive, but you’ll likely have to wait a little longer and it may make several stops.

Train
The Indian Railway operates several trains into and out of Bangalore. For the most part, the trains are well maintained. However, some travelers have complained that they offer little in the way of privacy. If you can afford it, pay a little more and get a sleeper cabin. Trains are great options for travelers who want to get out of the city and who want to spend some time in other parts of India.



Power suply

As part of this effort, a new substation being built by ABB in the heart of the city will help to meet the rising demand for power, and improve the quality and reliability of electricity in Bangalore.

The city is a major manufacturing hub and the center of India’s booming IT industry. Since the 1960s, its population has increased more than four-fold, and is now around 6 million. This has led to a significant increase in industrial and consumer demand for electricity, which means new infrastructure is needed to provide the city’s homes and businesses with quality power supplies they can depend on.

In general, the power grid infrastructure is robust and well planned. 



Water availability

British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) put Bengaluru on a list of 11 major cities in the modern era likely to run out of drinking water. The BBC blames a spike in population growth and new property developments, Bengaluru’s struggle to manage its water and sewage systems, and a colossal waste of drinking water due to poor plumbing. Bangaluru has already faced sevier water shortages. Water hasn't been availlable throughout the year and there have been serious concers regading the future of water availability in bengaluru.