Delhi officially the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT), is a city and a union territory of India.[16][17] It is bordered by Haryana on three sides and by Uttar Pradesh to the east. The NCT covers an area of 1,484 square kilometres (573 sq mi). According to the 2011 census, Delhi city proper's population was over 11 million,[9] the second-highest in India after Mumbai, while the whole NCT's population was about 16.8 million.[10] Delhi's urban area is now considered to extend beyond the NCT boundary to include an estimated population of over 26 million people in an area now called as Central National Capital Region (CNCR) comprising of cities Faridabad, Gurgaon, Noida and Ghaziabad, making it the world's second-largest urban area according to United Nations.[11] As of 2016 recent estimates of the metro economy of its urban area have ranked Delhi either the most or second-most productive metro area of India.[14][13][18][15] Delhi is the second-wealthiest city after Mumbai in India, with a total wealth of $450 billion and home to 18 billionaires and 23,000 millionaires.



Safety 

New Delhi is a fairly safe place to visit, but travelers to the area should be aware of certain situations and take a few precautions.

New Delhi is a big city with a population of over 12 million. Therefore it has crime issues that go along with being a city of such size.  Petty theft does occur and travellers should practice caution. 

Avoid wearing expensive jewellry, carrying large amounts of cash, looking flashy, or causing a scene.  Doing any of these is asking for trouble. 

Pickpockets thrive in crowded areas such as markets as well as bus and train stations.  Women should keep purses or bags close to their sides and men should store wallets in front instead of rear pockets.   

Avoid traveling alone at night.  This is a general recommendation for any unfamiliar area, but should be followed in New Delhi as well. 

Demonstrations, protests and mass gatherings occur in major public areas.  Avoid these situations as they can be dangerous.



Accidents

Mumbai and Bengaluru may envy Delhi’s wide roads but it has also its own disadvantages. Road accident deaths in the capital outnumber the figures reported in the other two cities.

In the last six years, at least 10,000 persons died in road accidents across Delhi. The number is more than thrice compared to Mumbai and at least two times more in comparison to Bengaluru’s road fatalities.

According to official figures of the Delhi, Mumbai and Bengaluru traffic police, there were 10,406 accidents in Delhi between 2011 and 2016. For the same period, Mumbai and Bengaluru registered 2,956 and 4,383 fatal accidents. The number of deaths could be higher because these are only cases. 

“In Mumbai or Bengaluru, the roads are linear and not radial unlike Delhi. Accidents are more in those cities but the fatalities are high in Delhi because of less congestion or the speed of vehicles on road. Mumbai has no avenue for accidents unlike Delhi. The intersections in Mumbai are residential unlike Delhi,”



Health

In addition to a thriving private health sector, the health care services in Delhi are provided by central government and state government. Central governmental agencies like Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, ESI, CGHS (Central Government Health Scheme), and Railways operate hospitals and dispensaries. At the state level, the Health Ministry of National Capital Territory (NCT) of Delhi is a major player. The state government typically spends about 10 % of its 40 thousand crore annual budget on healthcare. It runs 39 hospitals and about 300 allopathic dispensaries. In addition, the state health department also runs mobile dispensaries, school health scheme, Centralized Accident and Trauma Services (CATS) and its AYUSH department administers Ayurveda , Unani and Homeopathic dispensaries and hospitals. The department is also responsible for executing several public health programs.

At the national level, government of India spends a measly 4 % of its budget on health. Given that, Delhi’s 10 % looks healthier, but it still leaves a lot to be desired. Given Delhi’s burgeoning population, large clusters of slums (50 lakh population), the healthcare system remains overwhelmed. Visit any hospital in Delhi and you will see lack of resources, overcrowding, and lack of cleanliness. Poor political will, bureaucratic apathy and inertia have contributed to the sorry state of affairs. Many of the rural healthcare facilities are dysfunctional and a burden on the state exchequer because of the gross under- utilization.

Delhi’s crumbling health care system needs overhaul and some out of the box ideas. While, increasing budgetary spending on health will definitely help, there could be several other ways to meet the need. Affordable primary healthcare access is a major challenge for poor and middle class people in Delhi. 300 odd allopathic dispensaries and 9 Primary Urban Health Centers (PUHCs) are clearly inadequate to meet the demand. There is an immediate need to broaden primary health access points. Rather than opening up more dispensaries (thus, opening more avenues for leakage, corruption and inefficiency), we should look at alternative solutions. The existing government dispensaries can act as poly-clinics where credentialed private doctors can be allowed to come and provide healthcare at the affordable pre-determined prices or they can be reimbursed by the government on the basis of volume of patients seen. Similarly, it may be prudent to open up large numbers of government-approved primary level clinics owned/maintained and operated by independent healthcare providers. The patients can avail the health care from such avenues and the government would reimburse the bills to the doctors.



CCTV

From October, every residential neighbourhood and market in Delhi will be under electronic surveillance for public safety, the Delhi government said on Thursday.

Taking a step towards fulfilling one of its key poll promises, the Aam Aadmi Party government has finalised the concessionaire that would install 1.4 lakh CCTV cameras in different parts of the city at a cost of R272 crore.

“A public sector undertaking (PSU) has won the bid to install the CCTV cameras. Work will be awarded to the PSU by the end of this month. Each of the 70 assembly constituencies in Delhi will get 2,000 CCTV cameras,” said Sarwagya Shrivastava, engineer-in-chief, public works department (PWD).

A government spokesperson said the locations of the cameras would be decided by the MLAs of the constituencies in consultation with local residents’ welfare associations (RWAs) and market bodies.

The PWD will be the nodal agency. The MLAs will have to submit the list of locations and the department will forward it to the concessionaire.

Though the project has taken shape nearly three years after the AAP came to power, legislators welcomed the move, saying it had been a “long-standing demand” of residents.

“Within the first year of coming to power, I had spent over R2 crore from my MLALAD fund to install wired CCTV cameras in 51 colonies. But maintenance was a big issue as RWAs have limited funds. The quality of cameras was also not up to the mark,” said Saurabh Bhardwaj, MLA from Greater Kailash.

Maintenance will be the concessionaire’s responsibility for the first five years and after that the RWAs will take over. The residents’ bodies will have to set up control centres in every colony and monitor the live feed.

“We had conducted a survey and submitted our requirement of 60 cameras to cover entire Vasant Vihar over a year ago. It is good news that work on this will finally start. We will set up the control room at our RWA offices,” said Suresh Goel, president, Vasant Vihar Welfare Association.

The new cameras will be Wi-Fi enabled and will be installed by the company on a rolling pattern based on the lists sent by the MLAs.

The MLAs and RWAs plan to install these cameras at all the entry and exit gates of colonies, arterial roads, markets, parks and other public places.

The CCTV project was AAP’s poll plank in 2015. But so far, cameras were being installed either through MLA funds or a similar project for schools and buses. A citywide plan had been pending.



Hotels and food


Chandni Chowk Area

When you are in Old Delhi, you just can't miss the food there. The streets buzz with activity and are filled with the aroma of food. For the connoisseurs, there are restaurants like Karim's. For the food historians, there's a chance to taste Butter Chicken at Moti Mahal.

 
Street Food

Old Delhi Food
Chandni Chowk, often called the food capital of India, is famous
for its street food. The variety consists of snacks, especially chaat.
If you wish to enjoy it, shed your high-brow attitude to soak in the flavours and delicacies. Come on, everybody... Yes, it's a kind of celebration in congregation. Chandni Chowk resembles a fair everyday. The streets are lined with halwais (sweet-sellers), namkeenwallahs (sellers of savouries) and paranthewallahs
(sellers of rich, flaky breads soaked in ghee).


A good idea would be to start with the Paranthewali Gali. It became a famous gourmet locality when the parantha shops moved here in the 1870s. This lane has been the haunt of many celebrities of India. In the years after Independence, Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru and his family members - Indira Gandhi and Vijaylaxmi Pandit - came here to take their parantha meals. Jayaprakash Narayan and Atal Behari Vajpayee were also among the regular visitors.

 
Old Delhi Food

Though the number of shops in this lane has reduced - one wonders if their owners are more interested in McDonald's franchises - there still are a few left from the good old days. Perhaps the oldest among these is Pt Gaya Prasad Shiv Charan, established in 1872. Others include Pandit Devi Dayal's (1886) and Kanhaiya Lal Durga Prasad's Parantha Shop (1875). The paranthas are fried in pure ghee in cast-iron pans. They are served with Mint Chutney, Banana - Tamarind Chutney, vegetable pickle and Aloo Subzi. Half a century back, you could get only a few varieties - Aloo Parantha, Gobhi Parantha and Matar Parantha, stuffed with potato, cauliflower and peas respectively. While these continue to be the most popular, there are several new variants. These include lentils, fenugreek, radish, papad, carrot and mixed. Besides, there are paranthas which cost slightly more and include those stuffed with paneer, mint, lemon, chilly, dry fruits, cashew, raisins, almond, rabdi, khurchan, banana, karela, lady's finger and tomato.

 
Old Delhi Food

The real flavour of the Delhi street food lies in the chaat. The original chaat is a mixture of potato pieces, crispy fried bread, Dahi Bhalla, gram and tangy-salty spices. The mixture is garnished with sour home-made Indian chilly and saunth (dried ginger and tamarind sauce), fresh green coriander leaves and yoghurt. However, there are several other popular variants now, including the one with an Aloo Tikki. Let us explore a few of the chaat shops. Shree Balaji Chaat Bhandar (1462, Chandni Chowk; Noon to 10pm) is perhaps the best and most popular chaatwallah in Chandni Chowk. We particularly recommend the Papdi Chaat with its liberal inclusion of Kachaalu Chutney, Khasta Papdis and saunth. Bishan Swaroop (1421, Chandni Chowk; 10am to 10pm) is one of those gems tucked away in the chaotic by-lanes of Chandni Chowk which keep alive the magic of another time, another taste.

Since 1923, this tiny little stall has dished out just three items: awesome Aloo Chaat, fabulous Aloo ke Kulle and mouth-watering Fruit Chaat.

 
Old Delhi Food

You cannot afford to give a miss to the authentic chaat at Lala Babu Chaat Bhandar (77, Chandni Chowk, Near McDonald's; 11am to 10pm). Glorious Gol Gappe served with a type of Jal Jeera that's packed with harad (a digestive), kachoris stuffed with potato and peas, Gobhi-Matar Samosas, Dahi Bhalla and Matar Paneer Tikki are the fastest-selling items here. Jugal Kishor Ramji Lal (23, Dujana House, Chawri Bazaar, Chandni Chowk; 10.30am to 10pm) is best known for the Fruit Chaat that has become a quintessential part of the sounds and sights of Chandni Chowk. Though they do offer a version of Pao Bhaji and Aloo Tikki, it's the Fruit Chaat that is the winner here. Dahi Bhalla need not always be a part of chaat; it can be served as a principal dish as you will find at Natraj Dahi Bhalla. The delicacy called Dahi Bhalla is a deep-fried urad dal dumpling smothered in whipped curd. Often, it is streaked with chocolatebrown laces of sweet-sour tamarind chutney. Pink pomegranate seeds glisten in the folds of the curd. Natraj is located near Bhai Mati Das Chowk at the turning to Chandni Chowk metro station.

Kachori, usually stuffed with pulses and served with potato curry, is another delicacy that makes your mouth water. Jung Bahadur Kachori Wala (1104, Chhatta Madan Gopal, Chandni Chowk; 10.30am to 8pm) is perhaps the most famous for its Urad Dal Kachori, which is served with Aloo Subzi. This place is surely worth the adventure.

 
Old Delhi Food

On the sweeter side, Rabdi Faluda is a must. And the place to have it is Giani di Hatti near the Fatehpuri Mosque. It has now become an ice-cream parlour specializing in exotic flavours like Litchi and Bubblegum. Apart from standard ice creams, they also serve milkshakes, fruit shakes, ice-cream shakes and sundaes. If you are interested in kulfi - a flavoured frozen dessert made of milk - venture towards the Ajmeri Gate. The popular name here is Siya Ram Nannumal Kulfiwale (629, Gali Lodan, Ajmeri Gate; 7am to 4pm). What you get here is kulfi as kulfi should be - sinful, scrumptious and oh-so-splendid! Order any flavour - Kesar, Pista, Rose, Kewra, Banana, Mango, or Pomegranate. Or better still, order one of each.... Indulge!

Coming back to Chandni Chowk, you meet the Old and Famous Jalebiwala just before you enter Dariba Kalan. Refresh yourself with a delicious plate of hot jalebis - a sweet made by deepfrying batter in a kind of pretzel shape and then soaked in syrup. Also, don't miss the Jama Masjid area that buzzes with activity. The aroma of food wafts to your nose from the Urdu Bazaar facing Gate No. 1 of the Masjid and a side street called Matia Mahal. The smell of fresh fish, aromatic kebabs and fried chicken is in the air. Vendors sell kebabs and tikkas (made of buffalo meat) wrapped in rumali roti (paper-thin bread) at throwaway prices. The Mutton Burrahs here are easily the best in the city. They are practically the only place to serve Nihari and Paaya, which are all sold out by 8.30am Other unmissables are Stew, Mutton Korma, Shammi Kabab and Shahjahani Korma.

 
Old Delhi Food

Ghantewala at Chandni Chowk is more than 200 years old. The sweets here are prepared in pure desi ghee. Highly recommended are the Sohan Halwa Papdi, Pista Samosa and Badam Burfi - truly sinful pieces of heaven on earth.

Delhi's only tea boutique worth its name, this place bursts with atmosphere. Midway between New and Old Delhi, tourists in the know and locals in search of that magical cuppa beat a retreat to this store-cum-drawing room. Even if tea is not your thing, you can pick up gifts for friends. Even though it has distinctly frayed at the edges, the restaurant offers the cuisine it truly pioneered in the city - Dal Makhni, Butter Chicken, Reshmi Kabab, Murgh Musallam. After all these years, the Tandoori Chicken is still succulent. Chor Bizarre is one of the few restaurants to serve Kashmiri food and attempts to replicate a 'thieves market' in its decor. Specially recommended for non-vegetarians is the Tabak Maaz. Also good are the Yakhni, Rishta and Goshtaba, besides the wonderful greens - Haaq.

 
Old Delhi Food
BUTTER CHICKEN IN DELHI

Butter Chicken originated at the Moti Mahal, Darya Ganj in the 1950s. The restaurant was famous for its Tandoori Chicken. The cooks there would recycle the chicken juices that were left over by adding butter and tomato. Once, be it by chance or by design, this sauce was tossed around with pieces of Tandoori Chicken. And the rest is history. Butter Chicken was born and soon set tongues drooling the world over. Butter Chicken is creamy with thick, red tomato gravy. It tastes slightly sweet. The sauce percolates into the chicken pieces, making them soft and juicy. This melt-in-mouth dish tastes best with tandoori roti or naan.



Public toilets

 Sanitation and cleanliness remain worrying issues for Delhi and efforts are being made to better the national capital’s sanitation coverage. With an abundance of slums and unplanned colonies, and the municipal corporations’ unsuccessful performance in the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan till now, Delhi’s sanitation scenario is not becoming of a national capital. The city hopes to improve its track record with steps like the one on August 30, where Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal inaugurated 1,206 community toilets across 36 locations.

The toilets were built by the Government of Delhi at JJ Basti in Punjabi Bagh, West Delhi. The toilet complexes inaugurated are large 60-seater ones, accommodating a large number of people at one go. This is the second time in 2017 that the Delhi government had successfully inaugurated community toilets in slum areas to counter the problem of open defecation. Earlier in January this year, the Chief Minister had inaugurated 1,000 community toilets at JJ Basti in Kalkaji, South Delhi and also inaugurated 810 public toilets more in June 2017. With the recent inauguration, public sanitation in Delhi has received a much needed breather, but much work needs to be done for the city to become completely open defecation free (ODF).



Natural hazard and emergency services

The Bhuj earthquake was something of a watershed in Indian disaster preparedness. Several state governments, most so in the Northeast, and various central ministries were shocked into a comprehension of the dangers. However, national capital New Delhi, which is under perpetual latent seismic threat, is blissfully unattended. Neither the local nor the Union government has initiated any measures to protect the city.

It is true that Delhi is unlikely to be at the epicentre of a moderate to large earthquake. The highest earthquake magnitude experienced in Delhi in about a century was on July 27, 1960. It registered 5.6 on the Richter scale. Some buildings in the New Delhi area were partially damaged during that quake. A seismic damage survey, by the Central Public Works Department (cpwd), put the damage at about Rs 5 lakh.

In seismological lexicon, a moderate or major earthquake (magnitude 7.0 or more) causes two types of damages. The first, commonly known as epicentral damage, is confined to a 50-70 km radius. This damage is caused by 'body waves', which travel from the epicentral area to the surface of the earth through the body of the earth. Once these waves reach the surface, they are transformed into 'surface waves' or 'long period surface waves'. These waves travel along the surface of the earth, and their amplitude is the maximum at a distance of 200-400 kilometres (kms) from the epicentre. Surface waves cause the most damage to tall structures (height: 15 metres (m) or above). Single storey or even 2 to 3 storey buildings are not affected by surface waves.



Public transport

Metro

The Delhi Metro is hailed as one of the best rapid transport systems in all of Asia. Fast, clean, cheap and environmentally friendly, it can take you to almost everywhere, but not quite. Construction of an Inner Circle is still on, but for now it’s still a great way to cut down on auto fare and avoid Delhi’s terrible traffic.
Buses

Not quite the favourite of the locals and known to be unsafe for women, it’s still one of the widest transport networks in the city. Red buses are air-conditioned, green buses sadly not. Definitely the cheapest option available.
Taxis

The most expensive, but also the most comfortable. If you notice a driver failing to put on his meter, negotiate a price immediately, because if you wait for the end of the trip you’re going to have to pay any amount demanded. At this point, I’d like to add that radio taxis, particularly Ola Cabs are known for their competitive pricing and easy availability and are quite safe as well. Recent agitation against surge ricing by other radio taxis may mean that soon you’ll have a lot more similar options at reasonable rates.
Autos

The most proliferate of them all, autos line up at virtually every street corner and then zig-zag you through the traffic at hair-raising speeds. Once again, if a driver refuses to go by the meter, make sure you negotiate the price beforehand. All autos are run on CNG so it’s a blessing for your carbon footprint as well.



Power supply

Delhi or the National Capital Territory (NCT) of Delhi is a metropolitan region located in northern region of India housing the national capital city, New Delhi which is India’s second most populous city after Mumbai. NCT of Delhi comes under administrative division of Union Territory. However, it has special status and has its own elected legislative assembly.

NCT of Delhi has total installed electricity generation capacity of 7,163 MW (as on 30st April, 2013). This includes installed capacity of power utilities in Delhi including allocated shares in joint & central sector utilities. The central and state sector constitutes 75% and 23% of the total installed electricity generation capacity respectively; which is mainly from fossil fuels such as coal. The private sector has around 2% share in the total installed capacity. Renewable power forms 10% of the total installed capacity (Including small hydro).



Water availability

With the matter of reduced flow of water pending before the Supreme Court and slated to be heard on April 2, Delhi Jal Board has again issued an advisory to the residents that water will continue to remain available at reduced pressure in upcoming days and people should store the water. Meanwhile, the pond levels at Wazirabad are still at 669.9 feet against the normal level of 674.5 feet.

The statement issued by DJB says that the affected areas include west, north, central Delhi and parts of south Delhi, including Delhi Cantonment and NDMC areas. People should store sufficient quantity of water till the situation improves.

“The situation has not improved since last month as Haryana is releasing lesser share of water for Delhi through Delhi sub-branch and Munak canal. In the past two months, the supply was affected due to pollution in river Yamuna. The production of Wazirabad and Chandrawal Water Treatment Plants (WTPs) of Delhi has been adversely affected. Rationing from other plants is being carried out,” a senior DJB official said.DJB has also approached the SC to intervene in the matter. 

 Supply of treated water will remain affected for a few days due to continuation of high levels of pollution in raw water from Haryana, the Delhi Jal Board said on Friday.

While high ammonia levels have led to reduction in the supply over the past few weeks in parts of the city, the DJB said it was “endeavouring to rationalise the water supply”, which would lead to low pressure supply for “few more days, till the situation improves”.

North, central, parts of south, west Delhi, including the cantonment, and Lutyens’ Delhi have been affected, the DJB said. Production at the DJB’s water treatment plants had been reduced due to “continuous pollution in River Yamuna and reduction in release of raw water by Haryana” in the Delhi Sub Branch of the river and the Munak Canal.
