Pune is the second largest city in the Indian state of Maharashtra after Mumbai. It is the ninth most populous city in the country with an estimated population of 3.13 million. Along with its industrial twin Pimpri-Chinchwad as well as the three cantonment areas of Pune, Khadki and Dehu Road, Pune forms the urban core of the eponymous Pune Metropolitan Region. According to the 2011 census, the urban area has a combined population of 5.05 million while the population of the metropolitan region is estimated at 7.27 million. Situated 560 metres (1,837 feet) above sea level on the Deccan plateau on the right bank of the Mutha river, Pune is the administrative headquarters of the Pune district. In the 18th century, the city was the seat of the Peshwas, the prime ministers of the Maratha Empire and hence, one of the most important political centers on the Indian subcontinent.
Considered to be the cultural capital of Maharashtra, Pune is known as "Oxford of the East" due to the presence of several well-known educational institutions. The city has emerged as a major educational hub in recent decades, with nearly half of the total international students in the country studying in Pune. Since the 1950s and 1960s, Pune has had a traditional old-economic base as most of the old industries continue to grow. The city is known for its manufacturing and automobile industries, as well as for research institutes of information technology (IT), education, management and training, which attracts students and professionals from India, Southeast Asia, the Middle East and Africa. Several colleges in Pune have student-exchange programs with colleges in Europe. The game of Badminton was developed in Pune and the game's earlier name was Poona.
The ‘Mercer 2017 Quality of Living Rankings’ evaluated living conditions in more than 440 cities around the world and ranked Pune at 145, second in India after Hyderabad at 144. The same source highlights Pune among evolving business centres and nine emerging cities around the world with the citation "Hosts IT and automotive companies". The 2017 Annual Survey of India’s City-Systems (ASICS) report release by Janaagraha Centre for Citizenship and Democracy, adjudged Pune as the best governed city amongst 23 major cities across 20 states.



Safety

The city witnessed a marginal rise of 1.14% in overall crime during 2016.  The number of overall crimes went up from 19,332 cases in 2015 to 19,554 cases in 2016. 
The city's crime rate, which is calculated as crimes per one lakh population, was 387.2 in 2016. These crimes included offences under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) as well as those under special legislative laws (SLLs) such as Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, Information Technology Act and Juvenile Justice Act, among others.
The city showed a 5.99% increase in IPC crimes - from 15,349 in 2015 to 16,296 in 2016. In 2014, as many as 14,468 IPC crimes were recorded in the city. Pune police is lazy, and do not take complaints sersiously. This is a serious problem for this city.



Accidents

Officials from MEMS said, "Most emergencies are recorded during 4 pm to 8 pm followed by 8 pm to 12 am, which accounts for 50 per cent of the total cases in state. The most likely causes for road accidents are high density of traffic or drinking and driving."They added that road accidents cause fatalities and some of victims suffer from mental trauma, loss of memory, loss of hand or legs.
Hanmantrao Gaikwad, chairman and managing director, BVG India Limited, said, “With an increase in the number of young drivers and newer cars on the roads, road safety has emerged as one of the major concerns in the state. The ministry of transport, NHAI and other related departments are undertaking many initiatives like building newer roads, widening highways and barricading, illuminating roads with high efficiency LEDs, to make travel safe for citizens. Accidents and deaths can be avoided if pedestrians and drivers inculcate road safety measures."



Health

Pune is warm throughout the year so take care of sunburns & sunstrokes if you are not accustomed to heat. Sunscreen is a must. It's also a dusty and polluted city so people all tourists should stick to air-conditioned cars and restaurants. All kinds of medicines are readily available throughout Pune at all medical stores. There are 24 hour open ones as well. There are a few hospitals, which are resonably good. Pune is not too good with more advanced operations. For more serious health issues, one can travel to Mumbai.



CCTV

There is a project to install 1300 CCTV cameras in Mumbai, of which 400 are functional. This network of CCTV cameras does not provide great surveillance, but it is a start.



Hotels and food

Pune has many hotels and restaurants. At Pune, tourists can enjoy great quality food but there isn't much variety in the cuisine. 



Public toilets

It is said that women in Pune are left with no right to pee. The grossly inadequate number of toilets for women in Pune is not only a reflection of ‘gender insensitiveness’ and ‘gender blind’ attitude among politicians and civic planners but also exerts a heavy price on health of the women of Pune.

By its own admission, the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) which is busy in beautification projects in parts of the city under the ‘Smart City’ initiative, does not have enough toilets for women in the city. There are barely 741 latrines and 373 urinals in the city for a population of 3.1 million. Of these, 348 are public toilet blocks and 398 are community toilet blocks in the city, Suresh Jagtap, head of the PMC’s Solid Waste Management department told Hindustan Times. 

Overall, Pune has very few public toilets and they are poorly maintained.  



Natural hazard and emergency services

It was determined that three factors led to the scale of the disaster: an antiquated storm-water drainage system, uncontrolled and unplanned development in the northern suburbs, and the destruction of mangrove ecosystems. As a result, the 2005 DRM plan was designed to reduce the impact of future extreme weather events. Massive public works projects were established to help reduce the risk of the city to future floods and the consequences of such events. The plan also outlined steps to protect human health before, during and after these extreme weather events to help combat the spread of communicable diseases around the city. In addition, the plan also included the enhancement of advanced monitoring and warning systems that would alert Pune's population. Many of these projects are already being implemented. Mumbai to have a world class emergency service system up and running very soon.



Public transport

Pune has an abysmal public transport system. According to the population norms the city requires a minimum of 1500 buses plying actively at all times. The PMPML as of 2013 had only 1200 or 1300 buses total, of which only 800 or so were in working condition at any given time. We had a sort of parallel semi-public transport in the form of six-seater rickshaws, but these were banned by the PMC from plying within the central areas of the city under political pressure from the 3-seater rickshaw unions.

Pune completely lacks a high-volume medium to long distance public transport, such as a metro or local railway. There is a proposal for constructing a metro in the city but the over-ground model being pushed by the PMC and state govt will only aggravate the traffic problems rather than solve them.



Power supply

Pune has continuous, uninterupted power supply. The city is able to easily meet the power demand of its people. The Power infrastructure is robust, stable, and well planned. 



Water availability

With the district reeling under a heatwave, rural areas of Pune have begun to feel the pinch of water shortage. At present, nine tankers are supplying in around four-five villages.

While the city is not in the grip of a crisis, it has already consumed 11.79 TMCft (thousand million cubic feet), far more than its allotted quota. As the temperatures hover around 41 degrees Celsius, surging evaporation levels pose a threat. The storage capacity of the four water bodies — Khadakwasla, Panshet, Varasgaon and Temghar dams — is 29 TMCft. However, Temghar dam, which is undergoing repair work owing to massive leakage, has been emptied.

The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) has assured citizens that no cuts are in the offing.

The irrigation department, meanwhile, has blamed the PMC for having failed to learn from the past crises. “The city has already consumed 11.79 TMCft and given its consumption pattern, it is set to consume more than 4.5 TMCft water in the next three months, taking the total consumption to around 16.30 TMCft. It is way higher than its allocated quota of 11.50 TMCft till the monsoon,” said an irrigation department official, requesting anonymity.

Overall, while water is raerly cut, Pune faces serious water shortage problems.
