Kolkata (formerly Calcutta) is the capital of West Bengal and the second largest city in India (after Mumbai). If Bangalore is the Seattle of India, then Kolkata is the sub-contintent's London. It is an 'in your face' city that shocks and charms the unsuspecting visitor. Abject poverty mixes inexplicably with crumbling British Raj-era gems, sprawling gardens and historical colleges. Long known as the cultural capital of India, Kolkata continues to spawn generations of poets, writers, film producers and Nobel Prize winners. If your trip only allows for a visit of one or two of India's metropolitan cities, than definitely consider placing Kolkata on your itinerary. Love it or hate it, you definitely won't forget the city on the Hooghly.



Safety 

West Bengal governor K N Tripathi expressed satisfaction over the law  and order situation in the state and called Kolkata a safe city for women. "As per published data by the National Crimes Records Bureau, Kolkata is a safe city for women, well behind in recorded crimes compared to Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru and Ahmedabad," Tripathi said in his address to the state assembly. "The law and order situation in the state has remained peaceful and under control. The response of my government against the social evil of any offence against women wherever it has occurred was swift and immediate," he said. In general Kolkatta is safe city. But why u want to stay out late at night and how much late. Up to 10 PM there should not be any problem anywhere. It is safe to travel by bus or taxi later also. Kolkata feels remarkably unthreatening, and is usually safe (though stray incidents involving tourists can and do occur). Most of the crime is generally non-violent. Petty crime (theft of personal property) is common and occurs regularly in local markets, tourists’ sites, and on public transportation (buses, auto rickshaws). Extra vigilance should be exercised in major tourist areas, overnight trains, rail stations, and at airports.



Accidents

As many as 56 people died in road accidents in Calcutta till today this year, a figure that has surpassed the death count in the first two months of last year. Records at Lalbazar say 54 people had died in road accidents in the city in January and February last year, compared with the 56 deaths in the first 46 days of this year. A few weeks ago, officers of the traffic department at Lalbazar had publicised statistics claiming the number of road deaths in 2016 had gone down to 407 from 422 in 2015.



Health

As of 2010, there are 48 government hospitals, mostly under the Department of Health & Family Welfare, Government of West Bengal, and 366 private medical establishments during 2010. For every 10,000 people in the city, there are 61 hospital beds, which is higher than the national average of 9 hospital beds per 10,000. Ten medical colleges are located in the Kolkata metropolitan area which act as tertiary referral hospitals in the state. Calcutta Medical College, founded in 1835, was the first Asian institution to teach modern medicine. These facilities are inadequate to meet the healthcare needs of the city. More than 78 percent in Kolkata prefer the private medical sector over public medical sector,:109 due to the poor quality of care, the lack of a nearby facility, and excessive waiting times at government facilities.



CCTV

The city police, which have installed around 800 CCTV cameras across Calcutta, are yet to get hold of a system that could automatically detect violation of traffic signal and capture the number plate of errant vehicles.



Hotels and food

Kolkata is a heaven for foodies and especially for people with a sweet tooth. Bengali sweets are famous and certainly needs no introduction however; the spicy, tangy and absolutely mouth-watering dishes that Kolkata has to offer will leave you undecided on whether you like the spicy Bengali cuisine more or the melting flavors of the sweetmeats. Add to that the traditional Chinese and Tibetan food that are found here and you’re spoilt for choices.



Public toilets

A survey has found that the Indian city of Kolkata has the smelliest public toilets in the country, followed by Delhi, Chennai and Mumbai.The survey conducted by the travel site HolidayIQ revealed that 95% of Indian travellers demanded more public toilets.



Natural hazard and emergency services

The city sits on a highly active seismic zone. And since it is located in the coastal belt, it can experience storms like the 1999 super-cyclone in Orissa. The unplanned filling up of the wetlands to the East which was the natural slope for drainage of Calcutta and the non-renovation of the canals surrounding Kolkata has exacerbated its vulnerability. The KMC has 141 Wards and 11 Boroughs and its Sewerage and Health and Relief departments play the Key Role in the Disaster Stage; while the Planning Dept with the Mayor Council plays role in pre-Disaster Stage. Though they have a rudimentary Disaster Management Plan it is not visibly effective as it is not Field Tested, rehearsed and well-publicised. It also lacks Standard Operating Procedures. 



Public transport

The transport system of Kolkata is a mix of modern mass rapid transport and the old transport modalities like the rickshaws. Kolkata is connected to the rest of India by the National Highways, the extensive network of the Indian Railways, and also by air. Most traffic to North-East India routes via Kolkata. Even with modern mass rapid transport like Metro rail and AC buses, people face heavy traffic on the roads of Kolkata. Kolkata is the only city in India with all modes of transportation, starting from the bus, locals, auto rickshaw, metro, trams to taxis.



Power supply

The Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation or CESC is the Kolkata-based flagship company of the RP-Sanjiv Goenka Group, born from the erstwhile RPG Group, under the chairmanship of businessman Sanjiv Goenka. It is an Indian electricity generation and the sole distribution company serving 567 square kilometres (219 sq mi) of area administered by the Kolkata municipal corporation, in the city of Kolkata. Load-shedding (interruption of power supply due to shortage of electricity) was common in Kolkata during the 1970s and 1980s. Recently the Calcutta power grid has seen progressively better performance and fewer outages. It has five coal-powered and one Gas Turbine Peak Load Power Plant.CESC has major plans to expand generating capacity to 7,000 MW over the next five or six years.



Water availability

Kolkata, one of the most water-rich cities in India naturally, is becoming water stressed due to bad planning and criminal activities. The Ganga flowing beside its western end, traditionally huge groundwater reserve and wide wetlands area in its eastern fringe which naturally treats its waste water and turns that as raw water for fishery and agriculture. Officially 15% of core Kolkata’s water come from groundwater sources and rest from surface water, with the entire city, excluding a newly added 25 square kilometre area in the south, being supplied water through pipelines. But the quality of city’s groundwater is under scrutiny due to spread of arsenic contamination as well as salinity incursion.