Ooty is located 86 km north of Coimbatore and 128 km south of Mysuru (formerly Mysore) and is the capital of the Nilgiris district. It is a popular hill station located in the Nilgiri Hills.
Originally occupied by the Toda, the area came under the rule of the East India Company at the end of the 18th century. The economy is based on tourism and agriculture, along with the manufacture of medicines and photographic film. The town is connected by the Nilgiri ghat roads and Nilgiri Mountain Railway. Its natural environment attracts tourists and it is a popular summer destination.[4] As of 2011, the town had a population of 88,430.



Safety

Ooty is becoming an extremely safe city very quickly. The city's security has greatly improved over the last few years. 

The crimes against woman saw a declining trend in Tamil Nadu during the last three years. In 2014, a total of 3,771 crimes were committed against women. The number marginally came down to 3,578 next year and last year it came down significantly to 2,502 cases.

The total number of crimes, which stood at 1,93,197 in 2014 fell to 1,87,558 in 2015 and it further fell to 1,79,893 in 2016. The crime rate also came down from 255 per 1,00,000 population to 244 to 230 respectively at a time when the population steadily went up from 7.55 crore through 7.67 crore to 7.79 crore.

The total number of fatal crimes in 2016 stood at 1,511 while it was 1,641 in the previous year. In 2014, as many as 1,678 people were murdered in the state. Of all the murders in 2016, as many as 92 were for gain. In 2015, there were 107 murders for gain and in 2014, a total of 127 persons were killed for gain.



Accidents

I found it very hard to find more than 2 accident reports in a year. Ooty has among the safest roads. It is a popular tourist destination, so the city has ensured it has among the best road infrastructure. It is a very friendly city where people drive safely.



Health

The health care system at Ooty is abysmal. While it is possible to get most medicins at Ooty, it has among the poorest health infrastructures. There are few large major hospitals. Ooty is in desperate need of specialized health care. For any serious medical condition, one would have to travel out of the city to get treated.



CCTV

There is no city wide project for installing CCTV cameras. The only cameras in the city and hapazadly installed by residents. The CCTV surveillance infrastructure is abysmal. Tourists would be advised to add a camera to their vehical (for their own safety).



Hotels and food

Ooty has one among the best hotels and restaurants. At Ooty, tourists can enjoy great quality and variety of cuisine from all parts of India. With cuisine ranging from south indian dosa to north indian panner butter masala. Ooty is among the best places for any foody to visit.



Public toilets

Tourists and residents of Udhagamandalam are badly hit by delay in construction of public toilets over the last few months at the tourism destination, though the municipality is preparing a Rs. 128 crore proposal to give a facelift to Ooty. There were 20 public toilets in the town. This included five toilets in the market area that has more than 1,000 shops. The toilets were maintained poorly and in July this year, the municipality razed them down to construct new ones. But, five months after they were demolished the new toilets were yet to be constructed.

Ooty has among the worst public toilets. There are very few toilets and the few that are there are very badly maintained.



Natural hazard and emergency services

A spot at Nondimedu along the busy Ooty-Coonoor highway which had been affected by a landslide earlier and covered with sand bags was hit again a couple of days ago. Expressing the view that the encroachers put not only their lives in jeopardy but also that of others, they hoped that appropriate safety steps would be taken and encroachments on steep slopes and along roads not regularised under any scheme of the government. At Coonoor a retaining wall which had been put up recently collapsed in the current wet spell.

Since the monsoon rain are usually accompanied by gusty winds a long standing plea of people especially those residing in the rural areas is that dangerously leaning trees and branches along the roads should be cut. Another demand is that steps should be taken to reduce pressure on the Ooty-Coonoor-Mettupalayam highway and alternative roads improved.

Ooty is badly prepared for any natural hazard, with really bad emergency services.



Public transport

Ooty does not have great public transport systems.

Two wheelers you can get for rent. One shop is there near Assembly Rooms theater in Botanical garden road.

You can prefer Buses which is cheap too but frequency will be less.

Autos you can get for nominal cost.

If you want to visit places around OOTY then you have prefer for Jeep or Cab. If you hire this through known persons then you can get best packages with good price.

Rented Bicycles - These are the most cheapest mode of transport in Ooty. This can cost you approx 20Rs/hr

Buses - The Tamil Nadu Tourism Development Board as well as private tour operators organize day-trips on buses. A day-trip by bus is likely to cost you anywhere between INR 125 to INR 150. It is an efficient and fast means of transport in Ooty.

Rickshaws - Rickshaws are also a good option. You can even bargain a bit.



Power supply

Ooty has among the best power departments. They are focused on always improving the power infrastructure. As part of this effort, a new substation being built in the heart of the city.

The city is a major tourist destination and the center of India’s booming tourism industry. In general, the power grid infrastructure is robust and well planned. 



Water availability

Ooty has great water infrastructure, with plenty of rain. It is expecterd that water will be available throughout the comming year. The Nilgiris district, especially Udhagamandalam Town, seems unlikely to face water scarcity due to good rain in the catchment areas last year.

According to officials in the Udhagamandalam Municipality (UMC), the availability of water in all the major reservoirs across the district including Marlimund, Tiger Hill, Gorishola, Doddabetta Upper and Lower, Kodappamund Upper and Lower, Old Ooty and Glen Rock, indicates that there will be no issues of water scarcity.

When compared with last year, when the district was reeling under an acute water shortage crisis, including both towns of Udhagamandalam and Coonoor, there is almost twice the amount water available in reservoirs and dams in the beginning of 2018.

“If managed well, the water could last well beyond the next summer season,” said an official from the UMC.

Apart from the Parson’s Valley Dam, where water storage levels are lower than last year because of it being used for power generation, Marlimund has more than five times the amount of water stored than last year, while Tiger Hill has water stored for up to 38.50 feet while it stood at just 3.50 feet last year. Similarly Gorishola has 14 feet of water left, while Doddabetta Upper and Lower have 31 feet of water and 14 feet of water stored respectively.

Officials said that the water available at the reservoirs will suffice till the next monsoon, and said that with careful management, will last well past the summer tourist season, when water consumption increases many fold.