Mumbai (also known as Bombay, the official name until 1995) is the capital city of the Indian state of Maharashtra. It is the most populous city in India with an estimated city proper population of 12.4 million as of 2011. Along with the neighbouring regions of the Mumbai Metropolitan Region, it is the second most populous metropolitan area in India, with a population of 21.3 million as of 2016. Mumbai lies on the Konkan coast on the west coast of India and has a deep natural harbour. In 2008, Mumbai was named an alpha world city. It is also the wealthiest city in India, and has the highest number of millionaires and billionaires among all cities in India.

The seven islands that came to constitute Mumbai were home to communities of fishing colonies of the Koli people. For centuries, the islands were under the control of successive indigenous empires before being ceded to the Portuguese Empire and subsequently to the East India Company when in 1661 Charles II of England married Catherine of Braganza and as part of her dowry Charles received the ports of Tangier and Seven Islands of Bombay. During the mid-18th century, Bombay was reshaped by the Hornby Vellard project, which undertook reclamation of the area between the seven islands from the sea. Along with construction of major roads and railways, the reclamation project, completed in 1845, transformed Bombay into a major seaport on the Arabian Sea. Bombay in the 19th century was characterised by economic and educational development. During the early 20th century it became a strong base for the Indian independence movement. Upon India's independence in 1947 the city was incorporated into Bombay State. In 1960, following the Samyukta Maharashtra Movement, a new state of Maharashtra was created with Bombay as the capital.

Mumbai is the financial, commercial and entertainment capital of India. It is also one of the world's top ten centres of commerce in terms of global financial flow, generating 6.16% of India's GDP and accounting for 25% of industrial output, 70% of maritime trade in India (Mumbai Port Trust and JNPT), and 70% of capital transactions to India's economy. The city houses important financial institutions such as the Reserve Bank of India, the Bombay Stock Exchange, the National Stock Exchange of India, the SEBI and the corporate headquarters of numerous Indian companies and multinational corporations. It is also home to some of India's premier scientific and nuclear institutes like Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Nuclear Power Corporation of India, Indian Rare Earths, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Atomic Energy Commission of India, and the Department of Atomic Energy. The city also houses India's Hindi (Bollywood) and Marathi cinema industries. Mumbai's business opportunities, as well as its potential to offer a higher standard of living, attract migrants from all over India, making the city a melting pot of many communities and cultures.



Safety

Tourists should travel to Mumbai with a sense of caution. It's a city in which visitors must use their street smartness in order to remain safe. For example, it's never a good idea to travel anywhere in India alone. Though it is not very common for tourists to be victims of any sort of violent crime, but it happens sometimes – and when it does, it is usually against tourists who are traveling alone. Also ,do not reveal too much information about yourself, your travel plans to any third person like Hotel receptionists, room service or taxi drivers. Do not accept any drinks from people who you just befreinded in a pub or a club, use of sedatives is rampant in India. Do not get friendly with people even though how elite they may be,there is always a chance of harm,so be careful,especially females. 

It is advisable to be in lit and touristy areas post 10 pm. Have a care ride at hand. One of the most common crimes to guard against is pick pocketing. It's very common for tourists get pick-pocketed in crowded areas. Best to not display money or other valuable items. Other forms of crime which occur often in Mumbai include fraud, theft, robbery, assault, and burglary. . Foreign tourists are often approached by people claiming to hold some official position, with fake documentations to prove the claim. Scammers can be very clever, sometimes acquiring the name of a tourist from his/her hotel. So please do not entertain any body who approaches you on his own!



Accidents

Mumbai An average of eight people were killed daily on railway tracks in 2016. Crossing the tracks was the leading cause of death. The number of deaths fell by 3% from 2015. According to the statistics obtained under a Right to Information application by activist Sameer Jhaveri, 3,202 passengers died and 3,363 were injured on the suburban railway network last year. In 2015, 3,304 people were killed and 3,349 were injured. The central line this year, whose network is more than twice as big as the size of western line, recorded the highest number of deaths. The statistics revealed that 2,114 deaths occurred on the Central Railway (CR) network and 1,088 fatalities on the Western Railway (WR) network in 2016. The number of injured was 1,856 on the CR and 1,507 on the WR in the same year. As many as 1,798 people, more than 50 % of the total fatalities, died while they were crossing the tracks. Other reasons were falling from trains (657), hitting the pole (8), slipping through the platform gap (13), electric shock (34), suicides (35), natural death (524) and others (133).

The city's urban geography has helped breed a culture of reckless driving. Cars zigzag through dense traffic jams, cutting lanes, overtaking from the left or zipping past red lights. Drivers know that the penalties are small and the chances of getting caught are low. Many scoff at the idea of wearing a seatbelt, while others casually take phone calls and answer text messages as they navigate through the maze of cars. In 2015 there were 23,468 recorded traffic collisions: the highest in the country.



Health

Mumbai is warm throughout the year so take care of sunburns & sunstrokes if you are not accustomed to heat. Sunscreen is a must. It's also a dusty and polluted city so people all tourists should stick to air-conditioned cars and restaurants. All kinds of medicines are readily available throughout Mumbai at all medical stores. There are 24 hour open ones as well. Hospitals, dispensaries, clinics are spread all throughout and medical care (world class !!) is extremely cheap compared to most parts of the world.



CCTV

There is a project to install 6000 CCTV cameras in Mumbai, of which 4000 are functional. This network of CCTV cameras provides great surveillance and safety.



Hotels and food

Mumbai has one among the best hotels and restaurants. At Mumbai, tourists can enjoy great quality and variety of cuisine from all parts of the world. 



Public toilets

Mumbai has a really efficient system of public toilets. It is now possible to easily find public toilets using google maps. Under the right to pee act, Mumbai has made many of its public toilets free of cost. In some selected, highly populated areas of Mumbai, the govenment has installed advanced toilets to efficiently serve the needs of the public.



Natural hazard and emergency services

As a highly vulnerable city to major natural disasters, Mumbai has experienced several major extreme weather events within the past decade that have effectively brought the city to a standstill and caused severe human and economic losses. In response to the growing need for a contingency plan, the city of Mumbai drafted the Disaster Risk Management Master Plan that outlines the city's commitment to mitigating future risk and damages that could potentially result through future natural disasters. 

It was determined that three factors led to the scale of the disaster: an antiquated storm-water drainage system, uncontrolled and unplanned development in the northern suburbs, and the destruction of mangrove ecosystems. As a result, the 2005 DRM plan was designed to reduce the impact of future extreme weather events. Massive public works projects were established to help reduce the risk of the city to future floods and the consequences of such events. The plan also outlined steps to protect human health before, during and after these extreme weather events to help combat the spread of communicable diseases around the city. In addition, the plan also included the enhancement of advanced monitoring and warning systems that would alert Mumbai's population of nearly 13 million of impending disasters. Many of these projects are already being implemented. Mumbai to have a world class emergency service system up and running very soon.



Public transport

Mumbai is stretched North to South and it as two railway lines running along its longer sides: Western Line along the west coast and Central Line along the eastern edge. The two lines meet at Dadar station.

Besides these two there are smaller lines such as the Harbour Line. Local trains are frequent during the day (every 2-5 minutes) and run till 12.30 - 1 am midnight. starting at 4.30 am in the morning.

Trains are the fastest and cheapest mode of transport but very very crowded and all of the tourist spots are far away from the railway lines, not recomended for tourists.

There are two types of taxis - (1) Black and yellow color  non-air-conditioned (2) Blue and silver color air-conditioned. Both have meters and it is compulsorily to use them. AC taxis cost about 25% more than the non-AC ones. All old and shabby non AC taxis over 15 years of age are phased out by the Government. Now all non AC taxis have an electronic meter which shows the exact amount of money you need to pay the driver which is Rs.21 for the first 1.5 km and subsequently Rs.12.35 for every km. There are quite a few on-call taxis (AC) which can be ordered over the phone/internet to come for a pickup at any particular spot for no extra charge. The meter reading starts with INR 27 (About USD 55 cents or about half of one USD). Night fares are 25% extra and are automatically added when the time changes from day to night fare periods.

Three-wheeler auto-rickshaws run in the suburbs of Mumbai outside the central city area beyond Mahim on the Western line and beyond Sion on the Central line. All the rickshaws have an electronic meter from 2013 and the minimum fare is Rs.17 for the first 1.5 km. They seat 3 and have no place to keep luggage except your lap or a small bag behind your seat.

Mumbai has an extensive network of buses - AC and non - AC. All have their destinations written in Hindi/Marathi in the front of the bus and in English on the left side next to the entry door. Red in color (non AC) and some are double decker buses on some routes. Most of the purple colored AC buses are now covered with advertisement hoardings!



Power supply

Mumbai is a city that never sleeps and always has power. The power grid infrastructure is robust and well planned. Power utility firms such as BEST, Tata Power and Reliance Energy have made extra arrangements to procure more electricity to ensure uninterrupted supply despite heavy demand.

In case of excess demand, a Tata Power official said the firm will source more power from its own generating plants at Trombay and from outside Mumbai to cater to the increasing demand of 6.7 lakh consumers in Mumbai during summer.



Water availability

Mumbai controls several dams in Shahpur taluk (Thane district) that deliver water to the city. The Western Ghats trap most of the moisture laden monsoon clouds which feed these dammed rivers. Currently, these dams deliver approximately 3.4 billion litres of water to Mumbai daily. The water treatment plant in Bhandup, India is the largest and oldest in Asia. Tansa and Vaitarna dams supply the southern region of Mumbai, while the rest supply the suburbs. An underground tank in Malabar Hills is used to store the water. These sources ensure that resident of Mumbai have uninterupted access to water.