Ahmedabad (also spelled Ahmadabad) was establised by muslim ruller Sultan Ahmed Shah, ahmedabad is the sixth largest city (pop. 6.5 million) in India, and it's India's first UNESCO World Heritage City. It is the commercial hub of the state of Gujarat, though it is not the state capital, which is its twin city Gandhinagar, 30 km to the north. Although it is not very well known as a 'tourist' place, it is certainly worth a visit. Actually, the fact that there are fewer tourists will often get you a warmer welcome here. Also Gujaratis are known for their hospitality.



Safety

The city has long worn a safe tag, and not entirely without reason - Ahmedabad has registered fewer violent crimes than the national average, but when it comes to thefts, robberies and white collar crimes, the city scores high. According to the latest National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) report, the city has been ranked fourth in India, with 21,347 cases registered. In 2011, Ahmedabad was fifth on the list, with 20,203 cases. The number of complaints has increased by 5.7%.

According to the NCRB, Ahmedabad reported 90 murder cases, 49 attempts to murder, 63 rapes, 229 kidnappings (with 183 female victims), 603 robberies, 701 burglaries, 3,622 thefts and 1,320 assaults in 2012. Ahmedabad has reported a higher number of economic offences such as cheating, criminal breach of trust and other white collar crimes. Against the national crime rate of 294.9 (complaints registered per one lakh population), the city clocks in at 336.1.



Accidents

Last year, on an average, the city traffic police registered five accidents every day and the loss of six lives every week. While police have registered a slight rise in the number of total road traffic accidents (RTA), the silver lining is that compared to 2015, fewer lives were lost on city roads.



Health

Healthcare in Ahmedabad is provided through several hospitals and medical colleges - both government and private. In addition to providing healthcare to the Gujarat population, Ahmedabad also focuses on medical tourism and in 2009 received about 1,500 visitors from outside the state, including some from abroad. Opened in 1953, Ahmedabad Civil Hospital is the largest hospital in Asia. Sheth Vadilal Sarabhai General Hospital is the center for significant trauma management.



CCTV

The Ahmedabad Regional Transport Office has installed 64 high-resolution CCTV cameras inside the building to keep a close eye on employees. 



Hotels and food

What makes the food in Ahmedabad really special is the fact that it is home to not only the unique local flavours but also offers the city’s very own personal touch to the popular food from other parts of the country. The street food in Ahmedabad boasts a wide variety of flavours that are just out there waiting to be devoured by the foodies. Though the food one gets in Ahmedabad is mostly vegetarian. But there are some non-vegetarian hotels too.


Public toilets

In an innovative way to eradicate practise of open defecation, Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) has announced 'use and get paid' scheme under which people will be paid Re 1 for using public toilets. Taking a step further in Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, the Health and Solid Waste Committee of Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation issued a notification on usage of toilets in public places that no commercial complex in the city will be able to deny visitors the use of toilet.



Natural hazard and emergency services

The city is located in the “Himalayan Collision Zone”-where Indo-Australian tectonic plate slides under Eurasian plate-causing active fault lines beneath. The Disaster Management Information System is a disaster management system that has been launched in Ahmedabad with a view to improve the pre-disaster preparedness in Ahmedabad and throughout Gujarat..The Disaster Management Information System is a disaster management system that has been launched in Ahmedabad with a view to improve the pre-disaster preparedness in Ahmedabad and throughout Gujarat.



Public Transport

Janmarg, also known as Ahmedabad BRTS, is a bus rapid transit system in Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India. It is operated by Ahmedabad Janmarg Limited, a subsidiary of Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation and others. It is designed by CEPT University. It was inaugurated in October 2009. The network expanded to 89 kilometres (55 mi) by December 2017 with daily ridership of 2,49,000 passengers. BRTS won several national and international awards for design, implementation and operation. It was rated Silver on BRT Standard in 2013.



Power Supply

The company is the sole distributor of electricity to consumers in Ahmedabad. Its generating capacity comprises of a 422 MW coal based Sabarmati Thermal Power Station at Sabarmati, Ahmedabad. Torrent Power has set up a 400 kV transmission system for evacuating power generated at its SUGEN plant to the various off-take centers. The project being implemented in a phased manner is nearing completion and is expected was functional during FY 2010-11.The T&D losses in Ahmedabad at 6.54% is amongst the lowest in the country. 



Water Supply

With severe water crisis looming large over Gujarat, the state government, after announcing a clampdown on water for irrigation and industries from March 15, has now decided to rationalize drinking water supply to the cities. Water supply to Ahmedabad, which receives 1420 million liters per day (MLD) from Narmada and Kadana dams among other resources, is expected to be cut by 200 MLD. Recently the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) has carried out a massive survey and mapping of tubewells that have been lying defunct and is planning to revie them.