Chennai is the soul of South India. If you have time to explore Chennai (formerly Madras), this 400-sq-km conglomerate of urban villages and diverse neighbourhoods making up Tamil Nadu's capital will pleasantly surprise you. Its role is as keeper of South Indian artistic, religious and culinary traditions.



Safety 

Chennai has reported the highest number of cases of cognizable crimes under special and local laws (SLL), accounting for 32.9 per cent of the total such crimes reported in 19 metropolitan cities in 2016, according to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB). However, the data need not be taken at face value as major chunk of cases that add to the alarming number are pertaining to SLL crimes covered by laws such as Motor Vehicles Act, POCSO Act, animal cruelty and food safety laws etc. 



Accidents

A Report on Road Accidents in India 2016, published by Transport Research wing under Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, Government of India, listed Chennai as the city with most dangerous roads, as it recorded 7,486 accidents in 2016, followed by Delhi which recorded 7,375 accidents. However, Tamil Nadu government sources said the number of fatalities was steadily declining from past.



Health

Healthcare in Chennai is provided by both government-run and private hospitals. Chennai attracts about 45 percent of health tourists from abroad arriving in the country and 30 to 40 percent of domestic health tourists. The city has been termed India's health capital. Multi- and super-specialty hospitals across the city bring in an estimated 150 international patients every day. Factors behind the tourists' inflow in the city include low costs, little to no waiting period, and facilities offered at the speciality hospitals in the city. The city had an estimated 12,500 hospital beds, of which only half is used by the city's population with the rest being shared by patients from other states of the country and foreigners. It is estimated that the number of beds in multi-specialty hospitals in the private sector in the city is in the range of 5,000 beds, whereas in the public sector it is over 6,000 beds. This works to 2.1 beds per 1,000 population against the national average of less than 1 bed per 1,000 population, making the city better than other cities in the country, viz., Delhi (1.4), Mumbai (0.8), Kolkata (0.8), Hyderabad (1.5) and Bangalore (2.1). However, this still does not fulfil World Health Organisation norms of three beds per 1,000 persons. By mid-2012, with the addition of at least 3,000 beds in four leading hospitals in the city, the private hospital sector in the city is expected to increase its bed strength by nearly 25 percent. 



CCTV

The Chennai police have installed CCTV cameras at places to monitor movement of people to provide surveillance and safety.



Hotels and food

Chennai's food scene has evolved by leaps and bounds in a recent couple of years. The city now has every cuisine from around the world be it Italian, Asian, Continental or any other. Among these multi-cuisine restaurants, there are these hidden authentic 'regional' gems to satiate your regional food cravings.



Public toilets

An allocation of Rs 2,000 crore was made for infrastructure development in the city, out of which, nearly Rs 60 crore was utilised to build bio-toilets at 350 locations across the city. Namma Toilet, Saraplast and Wockhardt undertook the contract for building them. E-toilets, bio-toilets, and mobile toilets were installed at around 350 locations across the metropolis to improve the sanitation standards, but as many of them turned non-functional, residents say that maintenance has become a tough task for the civic body.



Natural hazard and emergency services

The whole Chennai Metropolitan Area falls under Seismic Zone – III. Chennai costal area falls into cycle prone area. he City Disaster Management Plan-2017 (CDMP), prepared by the GCC, is a logical first step to build the confidence among citizens to establish preparedness of the city administration for disasters. 



Public transport

Chennai's economic development has been closely tied to its port and transport infrastructure, and it is considered as one of the best infrastructure in India. The Chennai Mofussil Bus Terminus (CMBT), opened in 2001, is one of the largest bus station in Asia, and serves as the terminus for all intercity buses from Chennai. Some auto drivers will try to charge overly high prices, especially to foreigners who might not realize they are being fleeced. Chennai has a suburban rail system with four major routes and an international airport.



Power supply

Though there is enough electricity to meet the demand, problems in feeder lines and sub-stations have led to some unscheduled outages. Tangedco (Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation) officials attend to the problems and restore power, which could take a few minutes or sometimes even a few hours. A senior Tangedco official said though the highest demand touched 15,440 MW and consumption recorded 355 MU on Friday, there were not many disruptions in the city which reflects the robust distribution network.


Water availability

Although three rivers flow through the metropolitan region and drain into the Bay of Bengal, Chennai has historically relied on annual monsoon rains to replenish its water reservoirs since the rivers are polluted with sewage. With the population increasing over the decades, the city has faced water supply shortages, and its ground water levels have been depleted. An earlier Veeranam Lake project aimed at augmenting the city's water supply failed. However, the New Veeranam project, which became operational in September 2004, has greatly reduced dependency on distant sources. In recent years, heavy and consistent monsoon rains and rainwater harvesting (RWH) by Chennai Metro Water at its Anna Nagar Rain Centre have significantly reduced water shortages.The city has constructed a couple of sea water desalination plants to further increase the water supply, with the two functioning since 2010 and 2013, respectively. A third one has been planned. However, Chennai is expected to face a huge deficit of 713 million litres per day (MLD) as the demand is projected at 2,248 MLD and supply estimated at only 1,535 MLD in 2026.


