Hyderabad is the capital of the Indian state of Telangana and de jure capital of Andhra Pradesh.[A] Occupying 650 square kilometres (250 sq mi) along the banks of the Musi River, it has a population of about 6.7 million and a metropolitan population of about 7.75 million, making it the fourth most populous city and sixth most populous urban agglomeration in India. At an average altitude of 542 metres (1,778 ft), much of Hyderabad is situated on hilly terrain around artificial lakes, including Hussain Sagar—predating the city's founding—north of the city centre.




Safety 

Like most exotic places in the East, Hyderabad is a wonderful place for tourists to visit, with its rich and fascinating history and culture. The Hyderabadis are also quite friendly and accommodating, and while people from the western countries will stand out (both figuratively and literally), they will never feel like a sore thumb sticking out. Hyderabad is a fusion of the old and the new, and a tourist will never run out of interesting places to see and new activities to experience.

There is one thing that most tourists are concerned about however, and this doesn’t apply to just Hyderabad: their safety in a place that is foreign and new. In this aspect, Hyderabad shouldn’t be a problem; it is one of the safest metropolises in India. It is almost at par with the other major cities around Asia. Police presence is pretty much very strong, and there are enough hospitals and medical facilities in Hyderabad in the case of sudden emergencies. Although Hyderabad has suffered some terrorist outrages as of May 2007 in the form of bomb blasts, security has been significantly tightened in areas where tourists might congregate. This might alarm some visitors who might feel that such tight security will dampen their enjoyment of the vacation, but it should be kept in mind that such measures are only for the safety of the tourists in mind. The old city part of Hyderabad, in particular, is a communally-sensitive area. There was a time when it was a venue for several religious riots and it was common for police to enforce a curfew in the area. However, the situation has vastly improved across the years.

This is not to say, however, that it is okay for everyone to be relaxed; such isn’t the case. Even if security is more than adequate in Hyderabad, there are still a few steps the average tourist can take in order to increase their safety as well as their enjoyment of their vacation.



Accidents

Road accidents in Telangana have come down to 22,475 accidents in 2017 from 22,811 accidents in 2016 shows statistics by Telangana Road Safety authorities. With a few preventive measures, the state government has reduced fatalities and accidents, from 7,219 fatalities in 22,811 accidents in 2016; and fatalities reduced to 6,595 from 22,475 road accidents in the year 2017.

A large number of gadgets such as laser guns, breath analysers, surveillance cameras and cranes have been acquired to increase the enforcement work, according to the road safety authorities. The road safety authorities also took various measures like creating awareness against drunken driving, over loading, no-helmet drving, over speeding, mobile-phone driving and implementation of point-penalty system to reduce the road accidents



Health

The health care system in Hyderabad, India consists of 50 government hospitals,[1] with bed facility of 5749, and the city has around 165 Private hospitals and up to 4000 clinics and Nursing Homes and 500 diagnostic centers, Total providing up to 12,000 bed spaces in general. The health scenario in Hyderabad is standardized and easily affordable than many other cities in India.[2] [3] [4] The majority of residents prefer treatment at private health sector and the proportion of 28% of residents uses government facilities, due to far distance locations, poor quality of patient care and extreme waiting time.[5]

The Indian Heart Association, is a non-profit NGO headquartered in Jubilee Hills, Hyderabad dedicated to raising cardiovascular health awareness among the South Asian population.
 


CCTV

As part of measures to strengthen security and check crime, closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras will be installed across Hyderabad city in the next three months, Telangana Government said on Thursday.

"Installation of CCTVs in London has brought down crime rate by as much as 80 per cent. As part of security measures, CCTVs will be installed in Hyderabad city in the next three months," Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao said.

Every inch of the capital city, an IT hub which also houses several vital installations, will be mapped round-the-clock through surveillance cameras, he said.



Hotels and food

Hyderabadi Cuisine has different recipes for different events, and hence is categorized accordingly, from banquet food, for weddings and parties, festival foods, and travel foods. The category to which the recipe belongs itself speaks of different things like the time required to prepare the food, the shelf life of the prepared item, etc



Public toilets

Despite having poor sanitation, Hyderabad has been declared an Open Defecation Free (ODF) city. 

Special officers of the quality control division visited slums, schools, chapels, markets, and colonies managed by colony welfare associations, in four different parts of the city. They also visited a railway station and a bus station. 

Under the Swachh Survekshan Mission initiative of the central government, the GHMC had begun to construct individual and public toilets wherever necessary



Natural hazard and emergency services

While the government runs nearly 24,000 ambulances across India under the National Ambulance Service, data on private ambulances is hard to come by. It’s not clear how many cities meet the World Health Organization recommendation of one ambulance per one lakh people. Lalwani says most private hospitals do not have more than two or three ambulances. He hopes to change the present scenario where ambulances are located near hospitals.



Public transport

Getting around Hyderabad city is really easy by various local transports like Bus, Car, Auto rickshaw, Motorcycle & Train.

Like other Indian cities, Hyderabad suffers from traffic congestion. But now that we have new flyovers in the city, traffic congestions have reduced to an extent. To solve traffic congestion completely, there are several more flyovers under construction.

Outer ring road and inner ring road work is also under process. Various projects have been sanctioned for easy traffic flow.



Power supply


Electricity Voltage in HyderabadHyderabad is a well-lit city and is one of the most developed and urban metropolis in India. Located on the banks of the Musi River, Hyderabad is a city of many historic spots and attracts thousands of tourists every year. Right from disembarking at Rajiv Gandhi Hyderabad International Airport to visiting one of the upmarket streets of the city, you will always find that the city is bedecked with light. However, there might be a few places in Hyderabad where you might encounter erratic, fluctuating electricity or voltage issues. In such a case, it is best to keep yourself equipped and prepare yourself before you head out to different parts of the city. Nowadays, the Central Power Distribution Company Limited (CPDCL) has rapidly installed prepaid electric meters around the municipality to prevent the pilferage and fluctuation of power. If you are visiting Hyderabad for the first time and would like to know more about the electricity, read on. 



Water availability

Water woes loom large over the city. In a letter written to the Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board (HMWSSB), the state irrigation department has said that it will not be able to maintain the minimum draw down level (MDDL) of 510 feet at the Nagarjunasagar Dam in the Krishna river basin. 

At present, the water level is 522.6 feet. The department has asked the Board to prepare to carry out emergency pumping from the end of March.  Even though the Water Board already has emergency pumps, the installation of a pumping station will cost `5 crore.

The Water Board is currently supplying 387 million gallons a day (MGD) from Phases I, II and III of the Krishna Drinking Water Supply Project, and Phase I of the Godavari Project. A total of 226 MGD is supplied from projects on the Krishna. If the pumping of water from the Krishna basin is delayed, about two-thirds of the city will face a severe water crisis.  

The irrigation department has also informed the Water Board that the reliability of Nagarjunasagar reservoir as a source of water is diminishing at an alarming pace. 

According to highly-placed sources in the corporation, the irrigation department has alerted the Water Board regarding the situation and asked it to prepare to carry out emergency pumping from the Krishna basin. However, the Water Board has turned a blind eye to the warning and is yet to prepare a draft budget for the installation of a pumping station to draw water. 

