Jaipur is the capital of India's Rajasthan state. It evokes the royal family that once ruled the region and that, in 1727, founded what is now called the Old City, or “Pink City” for its trademark building color. At the center of its stately street grid (notable in India) stands the opulent, colonnaded City Palace complex. With gardens, courtyards and museums, part of it is still a royal residence.



Safety

Level of crimes is moderate in Jaipur; it is rarely directed toward tourists. The most common types of crime are theft, armed robbery, and harassment. Curfew was imposed in recent times after a dispute between police and a bike-borne couple sparked violence in the city, killing one and injuring seven. Jaipur is ahead of several much bigger cities in the country when it comes to crime against women. According to the NCRB data, Jaipur reported 192 cases of rape last year, more than cities like Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad. Jaipur reported third highest number of rape cases following only Delhi and Mumbai.



Accidents

Increased action against offenders by the Jaipur traffic police seems to have brought down the number road accident deaths in the state capital, police date have revealed.Data from the office of deputy commissioner of police (traffic), Jaipur, show that there has been a steep fall in the number of road accident deaths during the January-March 2018 period vis-à-vis the January-March 2017 period.

While 99 road accident deaths were reported between January and March 2017 , the figure came down to 78 in the corresponding period in 2018, registering a drop of 21%. Traffic police officials say that increased action against traffic violators, their counseling, and awareness campaign in schools and colleges are reasons behind the dip in the numbers.



Health

In recent times the strike by in-service doctors has paralysed the health services in Rajasthan with many specialised surgeries being delayed and patients flocking to private hospitals and clinics. The SMS medical college and hospital, which prides itself as the largest medical hospital in the state, too is feeling the pinch due to the strike. The medical officers, professors and senior residents are working round-the-clock to manage the crisis.

Rural areas like Ajeetgarh, Niwai, Chomu and district hospitals where doctors have gone on the strike are the worst affected, leaving patients in the lurch who are now forced to either shell out huge amount at private hospitals or come to Jaipur for treatment.



CCTV

According to police report, On the JLN Marg, 65 cases were registered against motorists for driving above the 100 km every hour limit with the help of CCTV cameras installed on the road. With the help of CCTV footage the police have identified miscreants in different cases.



Hotels and food

Authentic Rajasthani dishes are really high on the taste quotient. Dishes ranging from dal-baati-churma to laal maas, keema baati, ghewar, kulfi and a whole lot of other dishes that a treat for your taste buds. Rajasthani people sure know how to live in grandeur and their food is as mind blowing as their living style.

When visiting this exquisite city people often get confused with such varied option of dishes. The local street food of this city is spicy, tangy, ghee-dripping and simply irresistible.

There are many good hotels near the tourist spots.



Public toilets

The precast concrete toilets have many advantages over other prefab items available in the market. Such toilets have been a success in Jaipur. These pre cast toilets are made of cement and concrete and therefore they are rock solid, lasting more than the traditional toilets.



Natural hazard and emergency services

Facing abrupt patterns of rainfall and other natural calamities, Rajasthan is by and large safe from the effects of earthquakes. Keeping in the view the damages affected by the cyclone in the past few years in Gujarat the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India has issued the directions to all the states to rename the Relief Department as Disaster Management and Relief Department.



Public transport

aipur is well connected to almost every part of India and to travel within the city there are various means of transportation including buses, auto-rickshaws, cycle-rickshaws, and taxis. Rajasthan State Roadways provides the convenient and common public transport in Jaipur. You can travel in any part of Jaipur through the bus and the fair of the bus is also nominal. The city buses are functioned by Jaipur City Transport Services Limited of Rajasthan State Roadways Transport Corporation under JNNURM. It comprises of regular and low-floor buses. There are 3 main bus stands including Vaishali Nagar, Vidyadhar Nagar and Sanganer. In addition to this, there are AC and non-AC buses which connect Jaipur to the nearby cities and towns.

Private taxis and cabs are also available to travel in and around the city. They can be hired or booked through the travel agents. If you want to explore the city then, it is the best option and the fare is charged according to the distance covered once you get into the taxi. So, it is very essential to the check the metre of the taxi or cab and make sure it is working properly. Taxis with the fixed rates are available at railway station and airport. Another means of transport is an auto-rickshaw which is easily available everywhere in the city including the bus terminal and the railway station. Like taxis, the fare is charged depending on the metre which maintains the record of total distance covered and this is why, it is important to check that whether the meter is working or not before getting into an auto-rickshaw. Unmetered auto-rickshaws are also available in Jaipur which carries the people on sharing basis and charge very less. Furthermore, people also travel by cycle-rickshaws which are the cheapest means of transport in Jaipur and are also very easily available. This is the best option to travel to the smaller distances.



Power supply

The officials at discoms said that station-wise load shedding would continue till the power production is stabilized. According to Rajasthan Power Development Corporation, out of the total capacity of 1,500 MW of power at Surajgarh Thermal Power Station, only 725 MW power is being produced now while at Kota Super Critical Thermal Power Station only 590 MW of power is produced against the total capacity of 1,240 MW.

Power production at Kali Sindhi Thermal Power Plant has been cut down to 1,050 MW as against 1,200 MW. Similarly, two units each with a capacity of 1,200 MW belonging to Adani Power Rajasthan Ltd are totally shut resulting in a shortfall of 2,700 MW of power in the state at present.

Sources said that due to a change in the weather pattern, there is shortage in wind and solar power production. Making up for the shortage from power exchange is also unviable due to the high rate at which the power is now being sold (Rs 7.15 per unit), necessitating load shedding.



Water availability

Jaipur is largely dependent on groundwater for its drinking water supply: 90% of the total drinking water demand of the city is dependent on groundwater, while 10%  is supplied from the Ramgarh Lake situated 35 km from the city. The water supply in the city is maintained by Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) Rajasthan.

The depth of the ground water table varies from 15 to 40 m with seasonal variations of 1 to 3m. There are 990 tube wells over the city through which 276 million litres per day (mld) of raw water is fetched.

Ramgarh Lake is the only surface water source of the city. It is an impounded reservoir located 35 km northeast of the city. The lake is dependent on rainfall for its water supply.  It was constructed in 1903 with a gross storage capacity of 2650 million cubic feet. Due to the semi-arid climate zone, rainfall is sparse. Thus the lake almost dried up. Presently about 0.13 mld (0.35 lakh gallon/day) of water is taken from the lake due to erratic rainfall.

A report on the quality of piped water supply in Jaipur city based on data from NEERI and PHED Rajasthan said that atleast 70% of Jaipur receives water with a high concentration of TDS or contaminated by bacteria or both.
